README.md, before:

# Dotfiles Linux

Idempotent Bash install script for **Fedora 43** on the **Surface Go 3** (Intel Pentium Gold 6500Y, 4 GB RAM, eMMC storage). Transforms a Minimal Install into a fully configured Hyprland 0.53+ desktop with Tokyo Night theming.

## Hardware Target

| Component | Detail |
|-----------|--------|
| Device | Microsoft Surface Go 3 |
| CPU | Intel Pentium Gold 6500Y |
| RAM | 4 GB LPDDR3 |
| Storage | eMMC (`/dev/mmcblk0`) |
| Display | 10.5" 1920x1280 (~220 PPI), 1.5x scaling |
| Kernel | linux-surface (from linux-surface repo) |

## Installation

Two paths to the same result -- a fully configured Hyprland desktop:

| | Path A: Manual (Kickstart + install.sh) | Path B: Custom ISO |
|---|---|---|
| Network during install | Required (downloads packages) | Not required (all packages embedded) |
| Manual steps after boot | Run `./install.sh`, reboot | None (reboot to Hyprland) |
| Total reboots | 3 (USB boot, post-kickstart, post-install.sh) | 2 (USB boot, post-install) |
| Build step | None | Run `build-iso.sh` once (requires Podman) |
| Credentials | Edit kickstart placeholders | Injected at ISO build time |

After either path, `install.sh` still works for re-running individual stages (`--only fonts`, `--only theme`, etc.).

## Prerequisites

- **Secure Boot disabled** in UEFI firmware settings (hold Volume Up during boot to enter UEFI). Alternatively, you can enroll linux-surface keys after install using `surface-secureboot`, but disabling is simpler.
- A USB flash drive (4 GB minimum).

## Path A: Manual Installation (Kickstart + install.sh)

This path uses the stock Fedora Everything ISO with a kickstart file to bootstrap a Minimal Install, then runs `install.sh` to configure the full desktop.

**Additional prerequisite:** A network connection (the Everything ISO downloads packages during install).

### Step 1: Download the Fedora Everything ISO

Download the **Fedora 43 Everything** (netinstall) ISO from the [Fedora download page](https://fedoraproject.org/everything/download). This is a minimal network installer that pulls packages during installation.

### Step 2: Prepare the USB drive with Ventoy

Use [Ventoy](https://www.ventoy.net/) to create a multiboot USB with a reserved OEMDRV partition for the kickstart file. Anaconda has hardcoded logic to scan for a volume labeled `OEMDRV` and auto-load `ks.cfg` from it -- no boot parameter editing needed.

```bash
# Install Ventoy with 16 MB reserved space at end of disk
sudo sh Ventoy2Disk.sh -i -r 16 /dev/sdX

# Create the OEMDRV partition in the reserved space (use GNOME Disks or CLI)
sudo mkfs.ext4 -L 'OEMDRV' /dev/sdXN

# Copy the kickstart file (MUST be named ks.cfg)
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/oemdrv
sudo mount /dev/sdXN /mnt/oemdrv
sudo cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /mnt/oemdrv/ks.cfg
sudo umount /mnt/oemdrv

# Copy the Fedora Everything ISO to the Ventoy data partition
sudo mount /dev/sdX1 /mnt/usb
sudo cp Fedora-Everything-netinst-x86_64-43-*.iso /mnt/usb/
sudo umount /mnt/usb
```

**Note:** Anaconda may overwrite the OEMDRV partition during install. Recreate it after install if you need to reuse it. The kickstart's `ignoredisk --only-use=mmcblk0` protects the USB drive from `clearpart --all`.

### Step 3: Edit the Kickstart file

Open `kickstart/surface-go3.ks` and set the required values. The file has `CHANGEME_*` placeholders that **must** be replaced -- the install aborts if any remain.

1. **User account** (required) -- replace the placeholder in the `user` directive:
   ```
   user --name=edu --groups=wheel --password=$6$rounds=... --iscrypted
   ```
   Generate the password hash beforehand:
   ```bash
   openssl passwd -6
   # or: python3 -c "import crypt; print(crypt.crypt('mypass', crypt.mksalt(crypt.METHOD_SHA512)))"
   ```

2. **USERNAME in %post** (required) -- must match the `--name=` value above:
   ```
   USERNAME="edu"
   ```

3. **REPO_URL in %post** (required) -- set to your clone of this repository:
   ```
   REPO_URL="https://github.com/erodriguezh/dotfiles-linux.git"
   ```

4. **Keyboard layout** (optional) -- defaults to German (`de`). Change if needed:
   ```
   keyboard --xlayouts='us'
   ```

5. **Timezone** (optional) -- defaults to `Europe/Vienna`. Change if needed:
   ```
   timezone America/New_York --utc
   ```

### Step 4: Alternative kickstart delivery methods

Step 2 covers the recommended OEMDRV approach. These alternatives exist if OEMDRV is not an option.

#### Method A: Second USB drive

Format a second USB stick (or SD card) as FAT32 with the label `KICKSTART`, then copy the kickstart file to it.

**macOS** (replace `disk9` with your device -- use `diskutil list` to find it):
```bash
diskutil eraseDisk FAT32 KICKSTART MBRFormat /dev/disk9
cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /Volumes/KICKSTART/
```

**Linux** (replace `/dev/sdY` with your device):
```bash
sudo mkfs.vfat -n KICKSTART /dev/sdY1
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/ks
sudo mount /dev/sdY1 /mnt/ks
sudo cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /mnt/ks/surface-go3.ks
sudo umount /mnt/ks
```

Insert both USB drives and boot (use a USB-C hub if the device has only one port). Boot parameter:
```
inst.ks=hd:LABEL=KICKSTART:/surface-go3.ks
```

#### Method B: GitHub raw URL (wired connection only)

If the device has ethernet (or a USB-C ethernet adapter), point the installer directly at the raw file -- no second USB needed.

Boot parameter:
```
inst.ks=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/erodriguezh/dotfiles-linux/main/kickstart/surface-go3.ks
```

### Step 5: Boot and install

1. Insert the USB into the Surface Go 3.
2. Power on while holding **Volume Down** to boot from USB.
3. Select the Fedora Everything ISO in the Ventoy menu.
4. Anaconda auto-detects the OEMDRV partition and loads `ks.cfg` -- no boot parameter editing needed. (If using an alternative method from Step 4, press **`e`** at the GRUB menu to append `inst.ks=...` to the `linuxefi` line, then **Ctrl+X** to boot.)
5. Anaconda will start in text mode:
   - **Connect to WiFi** when prompted (the Everything ISO needs network access).
   - Installation proceeds fully automatically: partitions the eMMC, installs Minimal Install, creates your user (with sudo via wheel group), clones this repo.
6. The system reboots automatically when done.

### What the Kickstart does

- Targets the eMMC (`/dev/mmcblk0`) with GPT partitioning
- Creates EFI System Partition + `/boot` (2 GiB) + ext4 root (remaining space)
- No swap partition (zram handles it), no LUKS encryption
- Locks the root password (no root login)
- Creates your user in the `wheel` group (full sudo access)
- Installs Fedora 43 Minimal Install + `sudo` + `git`
- Clones this repository to `~/surface-linux`

### Post-Install

After the system reboots from the Kickstart install:

1. Log in at the text console as your user.
2. Run the install script:

```bash
cd ~/surface-linux
./install.sh
```

3. Wait for the script to complete (requires network for package downloads).
4. Reboot:

```bash
sudo reboot
```

5. After reboot, Hyprland starts automatically via UWSM.

**Important:** Run `install.sh` as your normal user, NOT as root. The script uses `sudo` internally for operations that require elevated privileges.

## Path B: Custom ISO Installation

This path builds a self-contained ISO with all packages, binaries, fonts, and configuration embedded. The Surface Go 3 installs fully offline -- boot from USB, reboot, and Hyprland is ready.

**Prerequisites:** Podman (for building the ISO), or download a pre-built ISO from GitHub Releases.

### Option 1: Build the ISO locally

```bash
# Build the container image (once)
podman build -t surface-iso-builder iso/

# Generate a password hash (do NOT use a plaintext password)
openssl passwd -6 > /tmp/hash.txt

# Build the ISO inside the container
podman run --privileged --rm \
  -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder \
  /build/iso/build-iso.sh --username=edu --password-hash-file=/tmp/hash.txt
```

The ISO is written to `output/surface-linux-F43-YYYYMMDD-x86_64.iso` (~1.5 GB).

For development builds with dummy credentials:
```bash
podman run --privileged --rm \
  -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder \
  /build/iso/build-iso.sh --test
```

See [iso/README.md](iso/README.md) for build details, credential options, and troubleshooting.

### Option 2: Download from GitHub Releases

CI-built ISOs use dummy credentials and are intended for testing only. Never use a public ISO with real credentials.

### Flash and boot

```bash
# Flash the ISO to a USB drive
sudo dd if=output/surface-linux-F43-*.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M status=progress
```

1. Insert the USB into the Surface Go 3.
2. Power on while holding **Volume Down** to boot from USB.
3. Anaconda starts in text mode and installs fully automatically (no network needed).
4. The system shuts down when done. Remove the USB and power on.
5. Hyprland starts automatically via UWSM with Tokyo Night theming.

**Note:** First `nvim` launch needs WiFi -- lazy.nvim auto-syncs plugins on startup.

### After ISO install

The `install.sh` script is still available at `~/surface-linux/install.sh` and works for re-running individual stages:

```bash
./install.sh --list            # show all stages
./install.sh --only fonts      # re-run just the fonts stage
./install.sh --only theme      # regenerate theme files
./install.sh --only dotfiles   # re-symlink config files
```

All stages are idempotent -- they converge to the same end-state whether assets were pre-seeded by the ISO or downloaded fresh.

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Full install (all stages, Path A only)
./install.sh

# List all available stages
./install.sh --list

# Run only a specific stage (prerequisites run automatically)
./install.sh --only packages

# Skip a specific stage (repeatable)
./install.sh --skip kernel

# Skip multiple stages
./install.sh --skip kernel --skip theme

# Build custom ISO (Path B — requires Podman; see Path B section above)
podman build -t surface-iso-builder iso/
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --username=edu --password-hash-file=/tmp/hash.txt

# Build ISO with test credentials
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --test

# Validate ISO repo completeness (no ISO produced)
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --validate-only
```

## Stages

The install script runs these stages in order:

| # | Stage | Description |
|---|-------|-------------|
| 1 | `repos` | Enable COPR repos (sdegler/hyprland, scottames/ghostty, alternateved/tofi) + linux-surface repo |
| 2 | `kernel` | Install kernel-surface + libwacom-surface (skipped on non-Surface hardware) |
| 3 | `packages` | Install all desktop and system packages via dnf5 |
| 4 | `binaries` | Download Impala (WiFi TUI) and bluetui (Bluetooth TUI) to ~/.local/bin |
| 5 | `fonts` | Install JetBrains Mono Nerd Font |
| 6 | `zram` | Configure zram swap (4 GB, takes effect after reboot) |
| 7 | `network` | Configure iwd backend for NetworkManager |
| 8 | `desktop` | Configure plymouth, getty auto-login, XDG portals |
| 9 | `theme` | Process Tokyo Night color templates |
| 10 | `dotfiles` | Symlink configs from repo to ~/.config/ |
| 11 | `neovim` | Bootstrap LazyVim with Tokyo Night theme |
| 12 | `services` | Enable and configure systemd services |

### Stage dependencies

Using `--only <stage>` automatically runs prerequisite stages:

- `kernel` requires `repos`
- `packages` requires `repos`
- `binaries` requires `packages`
- `fonts` requires `packages`
- `network` requires `fonts`
- `desktop` requires `packages`
- `theme` requires `packages`
- `dotfiles` requires `theme`
- `neovim` requires `dotfiles`
- `services` requires `packages`

## Hardware Detection

On non-Surface hardware (VMs, other laptops), the script automatically skips Surface-specific stages (kernel installation). Everything else -- Hyprland, packages, configs, theming -- works on any Fedora 43 machine.

## Idempotency

Running the script multiple times is safe. It converges to the same end-state without errors, duplicate entries, or accumulated side effects. Packages already installed are skipped by dnf, configs are overwritten to the canonical state, and symlinks are replaced atomically.

## Secure Boot

This setup assumes Secure Boot is **disabled** in the UEFI firmware. If you prefer to keep Secure Boot enabled, first run `./install.sh` (or at least `./install.sh --only repos`) to add the linux-surface repository, then enroll the signing keys:

```bash
sudo dnf5 install surface-secureboot
sudo surface-secureboot enroll
```

Then re-enable Secure Boot in the UEFI settings. See the [linux-surface wiki](https://github.com/linux-surface/linux-surface/wiki/Secure-Boot) for details.

## Log File

The install script logs all output to `/tmp/surface-install.log` (in addition to printing to the terminal). Check this file if something goes wrong.

## References

- [linux-surface Wiki](https://github.com/linux-surface/linux-surface/wiki/Installation-and-Setup)
- [Hyprland Wiki](https://wiki.hypr.land/Configuring/)
- [Fedora Kickstart Documentation](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora/f43/install-guide/advanced/Kickstart_Installations/)
- [sdegler/hyprland COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/sdegler/hyprland/)
- [scottames/ghostty COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/scottames/ghostty/)
- [alternateved/tofi COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/alternateved/tofi/)
- [LazyVim](https://www.lazyvim.org/)
- [UWSM](https://github.com/Vladimir-csp/uwsm)
- [mkksiso documentation](https://weldr.io/lorax/mkksiso.html)

Commit message:

fix(iso): remove stale output ISO before mkksiso for idempotent re-runs
- Add rm -f cleanup for output ISO and .sha256 sidecar before mkksiso
  invocation in stage_assemble_iso(), since mkksiso has no --force flag
- Log info message when removing a previous same-day build
- Document re-run behavior in iso/README.md troubleshooting section
- Note re-run safety in README.md Path B section

Task: fn-7-make-build-isosh-idempotent-for-re-runs.1

README.md, after:

# Dotfiles Linux

Idempotent Bash install script for **Fedora 43** on the **Surface Go 3** (Intel Pentium Gold 6500Y, 4 GB RAM, eMMC storage). Transforms a Minimal Install into a fully configured Hyprland 0.53+ desktop with Tokyo Night theming.

## Hardware Target

| Component | Detail |
|-----------|--------|
| Device | Microsoft Surface Go 3 |
| CPU | Intel Pentium Gold 6500Y |
| RAM | 4 GB LPDDR3 |
| Storage | eMMC (`/dev/mmcblk0`) |
| Display | 10.5" 1920x1280 (~220 PPI), 1.5x scaling |
| Kernel | linux-surface (from linux-surface repo) |

## Installation

Two paths to the same result -- a fully configured Hyprland desktop:

| | Path A: Manual (Kickstart + install.sh) | Path B: Custom ISO |
|---|---|---|
| Network during install | Required (downloads packages) | Not required (all packages embedded) |
| Manual steps after boot | Run `./install.sh`, reboot | None (reboot to Hyprland) |
| Total reboots | 3 (USB boot, post-kickstart, post-install.sh) | 2 (USB boot, post-install) |
| Build step | None | Run `build-iso.sh` once (requires Podman) |
| Credentials | Edit kickstart placeholders | Injected at ISO build time |

After either path, `install.sh` still works for re-running individual stages (`--only fonts`, `--only theme`, etc.).

## Prerequisites

- **Secure Boot disabled** in UEFI firmware settings (hold Volume Up during boot to enter UEFI). Alternatively, you can enroll linux-surface keys after install using `surface-secureboot`, but disabling is simpler.
- A USB flash drive (4 GB minimum).

## Path A: Manual Installation (Kickstart + install.sh)

This path uses the stock Fedora Everything ISO with a kickstart file to bootstrap a Minimal Install, then runs `install.sh` to configure the full desktop.

**Additional prerequisite:** A network connection (the Everything ISO downloads packages during install).

### Step 1: Download the Fedora Everything ISO

Download the **Fedora 43 Everything** (netinstall) ISO from the [Fedora download page](https://fedoraproject.org/everything/download). This is a minimal network installer that pulls packages during installation.

### Step 2: Prepare the USB drive with Ventoy

Use [Ventoy](https://www.ventoy.net/) to create a multiboot USB with a reserved OEMDRV partition for the kickstart file. Anaconda has hardcoded logic to scan for a volume labeled `OEMDRV` and auto-load `ks.cfg` from it -- no boot parameter editing needed.

```bash
# Install Ventoy with 16 MB reserved space at end of disk
sudo sh Ventoy2Disk.sh -i -r 16 /dev/sdX

# Create the OEMDRV partition in the reserved space (use GNOME Disks or CLI)
sudo mkfs.ext4 -L 'OEMDRV' /dev/sdXN

# Copy the kickstart file (MUST be named ks.cfg)
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/oemdrv
sudo mount /dev/sdXN /mnt/oemdrv
sudo cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /mnt/oemdrv/ks.cfg
sudo umount /mnt/oemdrv

# Copy the Fedora Everything ISO to the Ventoy data partition
sudo mount /dev/sdX1 /mnt/usb
sudo cp Fedora-Everything-netinst-x86_64-43-*.iso /mnt/usb/
sudo umount /mnt/usb
```

**Note:** Anaconda may overwrite the OEMDRV partition during install. Recreate it after install if you need to reuse it. The kickstart's `ignoredisk --only-use=mmcblk0` protects the USB drive from `clearpart --all`.

### Step 3: Edit the Kickstart file

Open `kickstart/surface-go3.ks` and set the required values. The file has `CHANGEME_*` placeholders that **must** be replaced -- the install aborts if any remain.

1. **User account** (required) -- replace the placeholder in the `user` directive:
   ```
   user --name=edu --groups=wheel --password=$6$rounds=... --iscrypted
   ```
   Generate the password hash beforehand:
   ```bash
   openssl passwd -6
   # or: python3 -c "import crypt; print(crypt.crypt('mypass', crypt.mksalt(crypt.METHOD_SHA512)))"
   ```

2. **USERNAME in %post** (required) -- must match the `--name=` value above:
   ```
   USERNAME="edu"
   ```

3. **REPO_URL in %post** (required) -- set to your clone of this repository:
   ```
   REPO_URL="https://github.com/erodriguezh/dotfiles-linux.git"
   ```

4. **Keyboard layout** (optional) -- defaults to German (`de`). Change if needed:
   ```
   keyboard --xlayouts='us'
   ```

5. **Timezone** (optional) -- defaults to `Europe/Vienna`. Change if needed:
   ```
   timezone America/New_York --utc
   ```

### Step 4: Alternative kickstart delivery methods

Step 2 covers the recommended OEMDRV approach. These alternatives exist if OEMDRV is not an option.

#### Method A: Second USB drive

Format a second USB stick (or SD card) as FAT32 with the label `KICKSTART`, then copy the kickstart file to it.

**macOS** (replace `disk9` with your device -- use `diskutil list` to find it):
```bash
diskutil eraseDisk FAT32 KICKSTART MBRFormat /dev/disk9
cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /Volumes/KICKSTART/
```

**Linux** (replace `/dev/sdY` with your device):
```bash
sudo mkfs.vfat -n KICKSTART /dev/sdY1
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/ks
sudo mount /dev/sdY1 /mnt/ks
sudo cp kickstart/surface-go3.ks /mnt/ks/surface-go3.ks
sudo umount /mnt/ks
```

Insert both USB drives and boot (use a USB-C hub if the device has only one port). Boot parameter:
```
inst.ks=hd:LABEL=KICKSTART:/surface-go3.ks
```

#### Method B: GitHub raw URL (wired connection only)

If the device has ethernet (or a USB-C ethernet adapter), point the installer directly at the raw file -- no second USB needed.

Boot parameter:
```
inst.ks=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/erodriguezh/dotfiles-linux/main/kickstart/surface-go3.ks
```

### Step 5: Boot and install

1. Insert the USB into the Surface Go 3.
2. Power on while holding **Volume Down** to boot from USB.
3. Select the Fedora Everything ISO in the Ventoy menu.
4. Anaconda auto-detects the OEMDRV partition and loads `ks.cfg` -- no boot parameter editing needed. (If using an alternative method from Step 4, press **`e`** at the GRUB menu to append `inst.ks=...` to the `linuxefi` line, then **Ctrl+X** to boot.)
5. Anaconda will start in text mode:
   - **Connect to WiFi** when prompted (the Everything ISO needs network access).
   - Installation proceeds fully automatically: partitions the eMMC, installs Minimal Install, creates your user (with sudo via wheel group), clones this repo.
6. The system reboots automatically when done.

### What the Kickstart does

- Targets the eMMC (`/dev/mmcblk0`) with GPT partitioning
- Creates EFI System Partition + `/boot` (2 GiB) + ext4 root (remaining space)
- No swap partition (zram handles it), no LUKS encryption
- Locks the root password (no root login)
- Creates your user in the `wheel` group (full sudo access)
- Installs Fedora 43 Minimal Install + `sudo` + `git`
- Clones this repository to `~/surface-linux`

### Post-Install

After the system reboots from the Kickstart install:

1. Log in at the text console as your user.
2. Run the install script:

```bash
cd ~/surface-linux
./install.sh
```

3. Wait for the script to complete (requires network for package downloads).
4. Reboot:

```bash
sudo reboot
```

5. After reboot, Hyprland starts automatically via UWSM.

**Important:** Run `install.sh` as your normal user, NOT as root. The script uses `sudo` internally for operations that require elevated privileges.

## Path B: Custom ISO Installation

This path builds a self-contained ISO with all packages, binaries, fonts, and configuration embedded. The Surface Go 3 installs fully offline -- boot from USB, reboot, and Hyprland is ready.

**Prerequisites:** Podman (for building the ISO), or download a pre-built ISO from GitHub Releases.

### Option 1: Build the ISO locally

```bash
# Build the container image (once)
podman build -t surface-iso-builder iso/

# Generate a password hash (do NOT use a plaintext password)
openssl passwd -6 > /tmp/hash.txt

# Build the ISO inside the container
podman run --privileged --rm \
  -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder \
  /build/iso/build-iso.sh --username=edu --password-hash-file=/tmp/hash.txt
```

The ISO is written to `output/surface-linux-F43-YYYYMMDD-x86_64.iso` (~1.5 GB). Re-running the build on the same day is safe -- the script automatically removes the previous output before assembling a new ISO.

For development builds with dummy credentials:
```bash
podman run --privileged --rm \
  -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder \
  /build/iso/build-iso.sh --test
```

See [iso/README.md](iso/README.md) for build details, credential options, and troubleshooting.

### Option 2: Download from GitHub Releases

CI-built ISOs use dummy credentials and are intended for testing only. Never use a public ISO with real credentials.

### Flash and boot

```bash
# Flash the ISO to a USB drive
sudo dd if=output/surface-linux-F43-*.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M status=progress
```

1. Insert the USB into the Surface Go 3.
2. Power on while holding **Volume Down** to boot from USB.
3. Anaconda starts in text mode and installs fully automatically (no network needed).
4. The system shuts down when done. Remove the USB and power on.
5. Hyprland starts automatically via UWSM with Tokyo Night theming.

**Note:** First `nvim` launch needs WiFi -- lazy.nvim auto-syncs plugins on startup.

### After ISO install

The `install.sh` script is still available at `~/surface-linux/install.sh` and works for re-running individual stages:

```bash
./install.sh --list            # show all stages
./install.sh --only fonts      # re-run just the fonts stage
./install.sh --only theme      # regenerate theme files
./install.sh --only dotfiles   # re-symlink config files
```

All stages are idempotent -- they converge to the same end-state whether assets were pre-seeded by the ISO or downloaded fresh.

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Full install (all stages, Path A only)
./install.sh

# List all available stages
./install.sh --list

# Run only a specific stage (prerequisites run automatically)
./install.sh --only packages

# Skip a specific stage (repeatable)
./install.sh --skip kernel

# Skip multiple stages
./install.sh --skip kernel --skip theme

# Build custom ISO (Path B — requires Podman; see Path B section above)
podman build -t surface-iso-builder iso/
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --username=edu --password-hash-file=/tmp/hash.txt

# Build ISO with test credentials
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --test

# Validate ISO repo completeness (no ISO produced)
podman run --privileged --rm -v "$PWD:/build" \
  surface-iso-builder /build/iso/build-iso.sh --validate-only
```

## Stages

The install script runs these stages in order:

| # | Stage | Description |
|---|-------|-------------|
| 1 | `repos` | Enable COPR repos (sdegler/hyprland, scottames/ghostty, alternateved/tofi) + linux-surface repo |
| 2 | `kernel` | Install kernel-surface + libwacom-surface (skipped on non-Surface hardware) |
| 3 | `packages` | Install all desktop and system packages via dnf5 |
| 4 | `binaries` | Download Impala (WiFi TUI) and bluetui (Bluetooth TUI) to ~/.local/bin |
| 5 | `fonts` | Install JetBrains Mono Nerd Font |
| 6 | `zram` | Configure zram swap (4 GB, takes effect after reboot) |
| 7 | `network` | Configure iwd backend for NetworkManager |
| 8 | `desktop` | Configure plymouth, getty auto-login, XDG portals |
| 9 | `theme` | Process Tokyo Night color templates |
| 10 | `dotfiles` | Symlink configs from repo to ~/.config/ |
| 11 | `neovim` | Bootstrap LazyVim with Tokyo Night theme |
| 12 | `services` | Enable and configure systemd services |

### Stage dependencies

Using `--only <stage>` automatically runs prerequisite stages:

- `kernel` requires `repos`
- `packages` requires `repos`
- `binaries` requires `packages`
- `fonts` requires `packages`
- `network` requires `fonts`
- `desktop` requires `packages`
- `theme` requires `packages`
- `dotfiles` requires `theme`
- `neovim` requires `dotfiles`
- `services` requires `packages`

## Hardware Detection

On non-Surface hardware (VMs, other laptops), the script automatically skips Surface-specific stages (kernel installation). Everything else -- Hyprland, packages, configs, theming -- works on any Fedora 43 machine.

## Idempotency

Running the script multiple times is safe. It converges to the same end-state without errors, duplicate entries, or accumulated side effects. Packages already installed are skipped by dnf, configs are overwritten to the canonical state, and symlinks are replaced atomically.

## Secure Boot

This setup assumes Secure Boot is **disabled** in the UEFI firmware. If you prefer to keep Secure Boot enabled, first run `./install.sh` (or at least `./install.sh --only repos`) to add the linux-surface repository, then enroll the signing keys:

```bash
sudo dnf5 install surface-secureboot
sudo surface-secureboot enroll
```

Then re-enable Secure Boot in the UEFI settings. See the [linux-surface wiki](https://github.com/linux-surface/linux-surface/wiki/Secure-Boot) for details.

## Log File

The install script logs all output to `/tmp/surface-install.log` (in addition to printing to the terminal). Check this file if something goes wrong.

## References

- [linux-surface Wiki](https://github.com/linux-surface/linux-surface/wiki/Installation-and-Setup)
- [Hyprland Wiki](https://wiki.hypr.land/Configuring/)
- [Fedora Kickstart Documentation](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora/f43/install-guide/advanced/Kickstart_Installations/)
- [sdegler/hyprland COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/sdegler/hyprland/)
- [scottames/ghostty COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/scottames/ghostty/)
- [alternateved/tofi COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/alternateved/tofi/)
- [LazyVim](https://www.lazyvim.org/)
- [UWSM](https://github.com/Vladimir-csp/uwsm)
- [mkksiso documentation](https://weldr.io/lorax/mkksiso.html)
